Remote mongodb (#32)
ni/systemlink-operations-handbook: handbook/data-stores/mongodb.md

# MongoDB

> The majority of SystemLink services use [MongoDB](https://www.mongodb.com) as the primary database. Default installations of SystemLink include MongoDB community Edition that launches when the SystemLink server boots. This is referred to as a [*single node*](#single-node-deployments) deployment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The majority of SystemLink services use [MongoDB](https://www.mongodb.com) as the primary database. Default installations of SystemLink include MongoDB Community Edition, which launches when the SystemLink server boots. This is referred to as a [*single node*](#single-node-deployments) deployment.
```

> You can also host MongoDB on a separate stand-alone server, a [replica set](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/replication/) of 3 or more servers, or use MongoDB's Platform as a service offering: [MongoDB Atlas](https://www.mongodb.com/cloud/atlas). This is referred to as a [*multi node*](#multi-node-deployments) deployment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also host MongoDB on a separate stand-alone server, a [replica set](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/replication/) of 3 or more servers, or use MongoDB's Platform as a service offering, [MongoDB Atlas](https://www.mongodb.com/cloud/atlas). This is referred to as a [*multi node*](#multi-node-deployments) deployment.
```

Reviewer 2: Is it intentional that only "Platform" is capitalized in "Platform as a service offering"? I would expect either nothing to be capitalized or more than the first word.

## Assumptions and Prerequisites

Before you configure a remote MongoDB instance to use with SystemLink, ensure you have the following:

> - A server running SystemLink 2021R1 or greater. Refer to [Installing and Configuring SystemLink Server and Clients](https://www.ni.com/documentation/en/systemlink/latest/setup/configuring-systemlink-server-clients/) for the basics of setting up a SystemLink server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A server running SystemLink 2021 R1 or greater. Refer to [Installing and Configuring SystemLink Server and Clients](https://www.ni.com/documentation/en/systemlink/latest/setup/configuring-systemlink-server-clients/) for the basics of setting up a SystemLink server.
```

- A standalone server running MongoDB, multiple servers hosting a MongoDB replica set, or a MongoDB Atlas Account
- A user with the `readWriteAnyDatabase` or similar role. Refer to [Role-Based Access Control](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/core/authorization/) for details. You reference this user in the MongoDB connection fields or connection string in **NI SystemLink Server Configuration**.

!!!important
    Due to a bug in a third-party MongoDB driver, SystemLink cannot connect to MongoDB instances where the MongoDB username either the `-` or the `_` character.

## Single Node vs Multi Node MongoDB Deployments

The following table summarizes when to use the various supported configurations of MongoDB with SystemLink.

| Diagram | SystemLink + MongoDB Configuration | When to use |
| | ----------- | ----------- |
|<img src="../../img/single-box.png" width="1500px"/>| Single node with defaults     | You have one server hosting both MongoDB and SystemLink. Use this during evaluation, when working with less than 10 managed nodes, and in deployments that don't need the Asset Manager and Test Insights modules.

> |<img src="../../img/single-box.png" width="1500px"/>| Single node with increased index cache   | You have one server hosting both MongoDB and SystemLink. Use this during evaluation, in moderate deployments of less than 25 managed nodes, and for moderate usage of the Test Insights module producing less than 100 test steps and results each day.  |

Reviewer 3: This guidance is always difficult. We originally set index sizing guidance based on 1GB per 10,000 test steps. If we give a limit here we should target a single object type (results or steps). Does the per step estimate help define the moderate use-case?

> |<img src="../../img/single-box.png" width="1500px"/>| Single node with increased index cache   | You have one server hosting both MongoDB and SystemLink. Use this during evaluation, in moderate deployments of less than 25 managed nodes, and moderate usage of the Test Insights module producing less than 100 test steps and results each day.  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|<img src="../../img/single-box.png" width="1500px"/>| Single node with increased index cache   | You have one server hosting both MongoDB and SystemLink. Use this during evaluation, in moderate deployments of less than 25 managed nodes, and for moderate usage of the Test Insights module producing less than 100 test steps and results each day.  |
```

> |<img src="../../img/mdb-sa.png" width="1500px" />| Multi node with a single standalone MongoDB Instance | You have SystemLink and MongoDB hosted on two separate servers. Use when the CPU, memory, and disk consumption of the MongoDB Windows service is impacting the operation of SystemLink services. Note, while this configuration provides for greater reliability by splitting the servers running SystemLink and MongoDB, it does not provide greater redundancy for data storage.   |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|<img src="../../img/mdb-sa.png" width="1500px" />| Multi node with a single standalone MongoDB Instance | You have SystemLink and MongoDB hosted on two separate servers. Use this configuration when the CPU, memory, and disk consumption of the MongoDB Windows service is impacting the operation of SystemLink services. While this configuration provides for greater reliability by splitting the servers running SystemLink and MongoDB, it does not provide greater redundancy for data storage.   |
```

> |<img src="../../img/mdb-rs.png" width="1500px"/>| Multi node with MongoDB replica sets | You have one dedicated server hosting SystemLink and three or more servers hosting MongoDB. **NI recommends this configuration for all production deployments including small and moderately sized deployments.** Use this to enable greater scale (>50 managed nodes, >1000 test steps and results daily). This configuration mitigates data loss with redundant replica sets. Refer to [MongoDB documentation](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/tutorial/deploy-replica-set/) for setting up and hosting a MongoDB instance with replica sets. |

Reviewer 3: Same comment as before on mixing steps and results. Steps are an order of magnitude larger than results.

> |<img src="../../img/mdb-rs.png" width="1500px"/>| Multi node with MongoDB replica sets | You have SystemLink hosted on a dedicated server and MongoDB hosted on 3 or more servers. **This is the recommended configuration for all production deployments including small and moderately sized deployments.** Use this to enable greater scale (>50 managed nodes, >1000 test steps and results daily). This configuration mitigates data loss with redundant replica sets. Refer to [MongoDB documentation](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/tutorial/deploy-replica-set/) for setting up and hosting a MongoDB instance with replica sets. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|<img src="../../img/mdb-rs.png" width="1500px"/>| Multi node with MongoDB replica sets | You have one dedicated server hosting SystemLink and 3 or more servers hosting MongoDB. **NI recommends this configuration for all production deployments including small and moderately sized deployments.** Use this to enable greater scale (>50 managed nodes, >1000 test steps and results daily). This configuration mitigates data loss with redundant replica sets. Refer to [MongoDB documentation](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/tutorial/deploy-replica-set/) for setting up and hosting a MongoDB instance with replica sets. |
```

> |<img src="../../img/mdb-atlas.png" width="1500px"/>| Multi node with MongoDB Atlas | You have SystemLink hosted on a dedicated server and connect to a MongoDB Atlas cluster. Use for large scale deployments (>200 managed nodes, 10,000 test steps and results daily). MongoDB Atlas also simplifies database provisioning, operation, backup and restore. These features may be desireable at any scale of deployment. Refer to [MongoDB Atlas](https://www.mongodb.com/cloud/atlas) for details on this service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|<img src="../../img/mdb-atlas.png" width="1500px"/>| Multi node with MongoDB Atlas | You have one dedicated server hosting SystemLink and are connecting to a MongoDB Atlas cluster. Use this configuration for large scale deployments (>200 managed nodes, 10,000 test steps and results daily) or to simplify database provisioning, operation, backup, and restore. Refer to [MongoDB Atlas](https://www.mongodb.com/cloud/atlas) for details on this service.
```

## Single Node Deployments

By default, SystemLink stores all data on locally hosted databases and the local file system. For more reliable data storage and scalability, NI recommends [remote data stores](#multi-node-deployments) for all production deployments.

### Increasing the index cache size for *single node* deployments

Increase the index cache size to process more data and use the Test Insights or Asset Management modules in a single-node deployment. This avoids high CPU usage that can occur with the default MongoDB memory constraint in SystemLink. NI recommends increasing the available memory for the index to 8GB. Refer to [Sizing a SystemLink Server](https://www.ni.com/documentation/en/systemlink/latest/setup/sizing-a-systemlink-server/) for system requirements to run SystemLink.
  

> 1. Log into the desktop of the SystemLink app server with a user with administrator privileges.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Log into the desktop of the SystemLink server with administrator privileges.
```

1. Open **NI SystemLink Server Configuration**.
1. Navigate to **NoSqlDatabase**.
1. Under **The NoSqlServer is launched and managed by SystemLink**, adjust the value in **The cache size of the database in Gigabytes (GB)**.
1. Click **Apply**.

<figure>
  <img src="../../img/mdb-cache.png" width="500" />
  <figcaption>SystemLink's NoSqlDatabase configuration set to 8BG</figcaption>
</figure>

## Multi Node Deployments

SystemLink supports three types of multi-node configuration. You can configure SystemLink to connect to a standalone instance, replica sets, or MongoDB Atlas.

> NI recommends connecting SystemLink to replica set of three or more MongoDB members or MongoDB Atlas for all production deployments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NI recommends connecting SystemLink to a replica set of three or more MongoDB members or MongoDB Atlas for all production deployments.
```

- NI does not support configurations where multiple SystemLink servers use the same MongoDB instance.
- NI does not support configurations where another production application uses the same MongoDB instance as SystemLink.
- While SystemLink can connect to and use a sharded MongoDB cluster (`mongos`), it will not take advantage of horizontal scaling capabilities enabled by sharded clusters.

> - When using MongoDB Atlas or [MongoDB Enterprise Advanced](https://www.mongodb.com/products/mongodb-enterprise-advanced), you have the option to encrypt the data stored within the database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When using MongoDB Atlas or [MongoDB Enterprise Advanced](https://www.mongodb.com/products/mongodb-enterprise-advanced), you can encrypt the data stored within the database.
```

!!!important "Connection String Formats"

>     Some connection string formats are unsupported or could cause issues in some environments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The following connection string formats are unsupported or could cause issues in some environments:
```

Reviewer 2: Would it be better to label this section as known issues with connection strings?

    - Connection strings that contain the query parameter `tls=` are unsupported. Use the `ssl=` query string to achieve the same degree of security.

>     - In environments where the 4.2.1.1 root DNS server cannot be reached, the DNS seed list URI format (`mongodb+srv://`) will fail due to a bug ([Unable to connect to Atlas due to DNS connectivity issues #358](https://github.com/kobil-systems/mongodb/issues/358)) in a 3rd party MongoDB driver used by SystemLink. In this case use the [MongoDB standard connection string format](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/connection-string/#std-label-connections-standard-connection-string-format) to connect your replica set. This affects both self-hosted replica sets and MongoDB Atlas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - In environments where the 4.2.1.1 root DNS server cannot be reached, the DNS seed list URI format (`mongodb+srv://`) will fail due to a bug ([Unable to connect to Atlas due to DNS connectivity issues #358](https://github.com/kobil-systems/mongodb/issues/358)) in a third-party MongoDB driver SystemLink uses. In this case, use the [MongoDB standard connection string format](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/connection-string/#std-label-connections-standard-connection-string-format) to connect your replica set. This affects both self-hosted replica sets and MongoDB Atlas.
```

Author: I fixed the IP, and dropped "SystemLink uses" since that should be obvious.

        - The `mongodb+srv://` URI format provides for more flexible deployments because clients will not need a new connection string should the servers in the replica set change.

>     - When URL escaping characters in your connection string  you must use uppercase characters, e.g. `%2F` not `%2f`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - When URL escaping characters in your connection string, you must use uppercase characters, e.g. `%2F` not `%2f`.
```

    Example connection string in the standard connection string format (line breaks for readability):
    
    ```url
    mongodb://myusername:<password>@
    ec2-123-123-12.compute-1.amazonaws.com27017,
    ec2-234-234-23.compute-1.amazonaws.com:27017,
    ec2-456-456-45.compute-1.amazonaws.com:27017/
    ?authSource=admin
    &replicaSet=rs0
    &readPreference=primary
    &ssl=true
    ```

    Consider using [MongoDB Compass](mongodb compass) to connect to your replica set to help construct a valid connection string and verify the configuration.

### Connecting to Standalone MongoDB instance

Using a separate server to host MongoDB increases reliability and lowers resource utilization for your SystemLink server.

You may use the supplied form input in **NI SystemLink Sever Configuration** when connecting to a server hosting a single standalone MongoDB instance. Refer to [Connecting to a Remote Mongo Database](https://www.ni.com/documentation/en/systemlink/latest/setup/remote-mongo-database/) for more information.

### Connecting to MongoDB with Replica Sets

> Replica sets provide a way to create redundancy in your database to mitigate against potential data loss. Refer to MongoDB for a [tutorial on deploying replica sets](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/tutorial/deploy-replica-set/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use replica sets to create redundancy in your database to mitigate against potential data loss. Refer to MongoDB for a [tutorial on deploying replica sets](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/tutorial/deploy-replica-set/).
```

To successfully connect to a MongoDB replica set and create redundancy, you must specify a connection string in **NI SystemLink Server Configuration**.

1. Log into the desktop of the SystemLink app server with administrator privileges
1. Open **NI SystemLink Server Configuration**.
1. Navigate to **NoSqlDataBase**.
1. Click the **Connect to an externally managed NoSqlDatabase server** radio button.

    !!!note "Secure remote connections"
        NI recommends securing communications between your SystemLink server and MongoDB instance with TLS. For details, refer to [TLS for Remote MongoDB Instances](/network-security/network-security/#tls-for-remote-mongodb-instances).

1. Select the **Use a custom connection string** checkbox.
1. Enter your connection string. Refer to [Connection String URI Format](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/connection-string/) for details on structuring your connection string.
1. Click **Test Connection** to ensure SystemLink can connect to the MongoDB instance.
1. If the connection test was successful, click **Apply** to restart SystemLink service manager and connect to the MongoDB instance.

### Connecting to MongoDB Atlas

> MongoDB Atlas provides simpler setup and adminstration compared to self hosted replica sets and stand alone deployments. MongoDB Atlas is a fully managed PaaS from MongoDB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MongoDB Atlas provides simpler setup and adminstration compared to self hosted replica sets and standalone deployments. MongoDB Atlas is a fully managed PaaS from MongoDB.
```

If you have not setup an Atlas cluster before, refer to [Getting started with Atlas](https://docs.atlas.mongodb.com/getting-started/). Refer to [Setup Atlas Connectivity](https://docs.mongodb.com/guides/cloud/connectionstring/) for steps to obtain a connection string.

!!! note
    In the sample connection string provided by Atlas you will need to replace the instance of `myFirstDatabase` with `admin`. For example:

    ```url
    mongodb+srv://<username>:<password>@<cluster>/myFirstDatabase?retryWrites=true&w=majority
    ```
    
    This will need to be updated to 
    
    ```url
    mongodb+srv://<username>:<password>@<cluster>/admin?retryWrites=true&w=majority
    ```

!!!important "MongoDB Atlas free tier is unsupported by SystemLink"
    Due to memory constraints on the Atlas free tier, you must use a paid tier for SystemLink to successfully connect. SystemLink supports all paid tiers of Atlas. If you need assistance evaluating Atlas with SystemLink please contact NI ([customer.requests@ni.com](mailto:customer.requests@ni.com)) or your local account manager.

> Because Atlas uses replica sets by default, your SystemLink server could be affected by the bug in the 3rd party MongoDB driver used by SystemLink as described in [Multi Node Deployments](#multi-node-deployments). If you cannot use the `mongodb+srv://` URI format, use the connection string generated for the Node.js driver version 2.0.14. This provided connection string is fully supported by SystemLink.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because Atlas uses replica sets by default, your SystemLink server could be affected by the bug in the third-party MongoDB driver used by SystemLink as described in [Multi Node Deployments](#multi-node-deployments). If you cannot use the `mongodb+srv://` URI format, use the connection string generated for the Node.js driver version 2.0.14. This provided connection string is fully supported by SystemLink.
```

Applies to everywhere this note is used in this doc

# MongoDB

The majority of SystemLink services use [MongoDB](https://www.mongodb.com) as the primary datastore. Default installations of SystemLink include MongoDB community Edition and launch it when the SystemLink server boots. This is referred to as a [*single node*](#single-node-deployments) deployment.

> You can slo host MongoDB on a separate stand-alone server, a [replica set](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/replication/) of 3 or more servers, or accessed through MongoDB's Platform as a service offering: [MongoDB Atlas](https://www.mongodb.com/cloud/atlas). This is referred to as a [*multi node*](#multi-node-deployments) deployment.

Reviewer 4: slo -> also

|<img src="../../img/mdb-rs.png" width="1500px"/>| Multi node with MongoDB replica sets | You have SystemLink hosted on a dedicated server and MongoDB hosted on 3 or more servers. **This is the recommended configuration for all production deployments including small and moderately sized deployments.** Use this to enable greater scale (>50 managed nodes, >1000 test steps and results daily). This configuration mitigates data loss with redundant replica sets. Refer to [MongoDB documentation](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/tutorial/deploy-replica-set/) for setting up and hosting a MongoDB instance with replica sets. |
|<img src="../../img/mdb-atlas.png" width="1500px"/>| Multi node with MongoDB Atlas | You have SystemLink hosted on a dedicated server and connect to a MongoDB Atlas cluster. Use for large scale deployments (>200 managed node, 10,000 test steps and results daily). MongoDB Atlas also simplifies database provisioning, operation, backup and restore. These features may be desireable at any scale of deployment. Refer to [MongoDB Atlas](https://www.mongodb.com/cloud/atlas) for details on this service.

## Single Node Deployments

> By default, SystemLink stores all data in databases and the file system hosted on the SystemLink application server. For more reliable data storage and scalability, Ni recommends remote data stores for all production deployments.

Reviewer 4: Ni -> NI

1. Click **Apply**.

!!!note
    Refer to [Sizing a SystemLink server](https://www.ni.com/documentation/en/systemlink/latest/setup/sizing-a-systemlink-server/) for guidance on the CPU, memory, and disk needed for SystemLink single node deployments.

## Multi Node Deployments

SystemLink supports three types of multi-node configuration. You can configure SystemLink to connect to a standalone instance, replica sets, or MongoDB Atlas.

NI recommends connecting SystemLink to replica set of three or more MongoDB servers for all production deployments.

!!!important
    Due to a bug in a 3rd party MongoDB driver, SystemLink cannot connect to MongoDB instances where the MongoDB username provided in the form input or connection string contains either the `-` or the `_` character.

- NI does not support configurations where multiple SystemLink servers use the same MongoDB instance.
- NI does not support configurations where another production application uses the same MongoDB instance as SystemLink.

!!!note
    While SystemLink can connect to and use a sharded MongoDB cluster (`mongos`), it will not take advantage of horizontal scaling capabilities enabled by sharded clusters.

> When using a stand-alone MongoDB instance, replica set, or Atlas, you have the option to encrypt the data stored within the database. This is built into MongoDB Atlas or requires [MongoDB Enterprise Advanced](https://www.mongodb.com/products/mongodb-enterprise-advanced) for stand-alone or replica sets.

Author: I may have missed this. I'm using your suggestion with a minor change to point out that these are the options that allow for encryption rather than backup.

!!!important "Connection String Formats"
    Some connection string formats are unsupported or could cause issues in some environments.

    - Connection strings that contain the query parameter `tls=` are unsupported. Use the `ssl=` query string to achieve the same capability with the same degree of security.

>     - In environments where the 4.2.1.1 root DNS server cannot be reached, the DNS seed list URI format (`mongodb+srv://`) will fail due to a bug ([Unable to connect to Atlas due to DNS connectivity issues #358](https://github.com/kobil-systems/mongodb/issues/358)) in a 3rd party MongoDB driver used by SystemLink. In this case use the [MongoDB standard connection string format](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/connection-string/#std-label-connections-standard-connection-string-format) to connect your replica set. This affects both self-hosted replica sets and MongoDB Atlas.

Reviewer 5: The caveat to avoiding the `mongodb+srv://` url is that if you scale up / down the number of replicas, you need to update the connection string in the SystemLink configuration, which will require restarting services.  (Although it may require restarting services even with `mongodb+srv` urls - is the dns resolution done only once upfront? I have not tried this.)

Author: I've worked this point in as a sub-bullet about 4.2.1.1.

If you have not setup an Atlas cluster before, refer to [Getting started with Atlas](https://docs.atlas.mongodb.com/getting-started/). Refer to [Setup Atlas Connectivity](https://docs.mongodb.com/guides/cloud/connectionstring/) for steps to obtain a connection string.

!!! note
    In the sample connection string provided by Atlas you will need to replace the instance of `myFirstDatabase` with `admin`. For example:

    ```url
    mongodb+srv://<username>:<password>@<cluster>/myFirstDatabase?retryWrites=true&w=majority
    ```
    
    This will need to be updated to 
    
    ```url
    mongodb+srv://<username>:<password>@<cluster>/admin?retryWrites=true&w=majority
    ```

!!!important "MongoDB Atlas free tier is unsupported by SystemLink"
    Due to constraints on memory in the Atlas free tier, you must use a paid tier for SystemLink to successfully connect. SystemLink supports all paid tiers for Atlas. If you need assistance evaluating Atlas with SystemLink please contact NI ([customer.requests@ni.com](mailto:customer.requests@ni.com)) or your local account manager.

> Because Atlas uses replica sets by default, your SystemLink server could be affected by the bug in the 3rd party MongoDB driver used by SystemLink as described in [Multi Node Deployments](#multi-node-deployments). When obtaining a connection string from Atlas use the connection string generated for the Node.js driver version 2.0.14. This provided connection string is fully supported by SystemLink.

Reviewer 5: Should this reference the section above about connection strings? Same caveat about avoiding the `mongodb+srv` url.

Author: I clarified this point.
